Add contribution docs for subworkflow nf-test (#2085)
nf-core/website: src/content/docs/contributing/subworkflows.md

We recently decided to use nf-test instead of pytest for testing modules & subworkflows. This is because nf-test is more flexible and allows us to test subworkflows in a more realistic way. You can find more information at [nf-test official docs](https://code.askimed.com/nf-test/) and [in this bytesize talk](https://nf-co.re/events/2022/bytesize_nftest).

#### Philosophy of nf-tests

- Each subworkflow contains a `tests/` folder beside the `main.nf` containing the test files
- Test files come with a [snapshot](https://code.askimed.com/nf-test/docs/assertions/snapshots/) of subworkflows output channels

#### Steps for creating nf-test for a subworkflow

- Install and update to the latest version of [nf-test](https://code.askimed.com/nf-test/installation/)

```bash
conda install -c bioconda nf-test
```

- Git checkout a new branch for your subworkflow tests

```bash
git checkout -b <branch>
```

- Create a new tests directory within your subworkflow directory

```bash
mkdir subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/tests
```

- Generate a test file from template for your subworkflow using nf-test

```bash
nf-test generate workflow subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/main.nf
```
:::note

> we use `workflow` instead of `process` as it is a subworkflow not a module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use `workflow` instead of `process` as it is a subworkflow not a module.
```

:::

- Move the generated test file to the tests directory

```bash

> mv subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflows>/main.nf.test subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflows>/tests/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mv subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/main.nf.test subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/tests/
```

```

- Open the `main.nf.test` file and change the path for the script to a relative path `../main.nf`

```diff title="main.nf.test"
nextflow_workflow {
     name "Test Workflow SUBWORKFLOW"
-    script "subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/main.nf"
+    script "../main.nf"
     process "SUBWORKFLOW"
```

- Then add tags to identify this module

```groovy title="main.nf.test"
tag "subworkflows"
tag "subworkflows_nfcore"
tag "subworkflows/<subworkflow>"
tag "<subworkflow>"
tag "<tool1>"

> tag "<tool2>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tag "<tool2>"
tag "<module1>"
tag "<module2>"
```

```

:::note

> We require to have `tag subworkflows/<subworkflow>` as so it's picked up correctly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We require to have `tag subworkflows/<subworkflow>` as so it's picked up correctly.
```

:::

:::note

> Include the used tools in the tags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Include the used tools and modules in the tags.
```

:::

- Provide a test name preferably indicating the test-data and file-format used. Example: `test("homo_sapiens - [bam, bai, bed] - fasta - fai")`

:::note

> multiple tests are allowed in a single test file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple tests are allowed in a single test file.
```

:::

- If migrating an existing subworkflow, get the inputs from current pytest files `tests/subworkflow/nf-core/subworkflow/main.nf` and provide as positional inputs `input[0]` in nf-test file

```groovy

> input[2] = [

Reviewer: ```suggestion
input[0] = [
```

           ]
```

- Next, in the `then` block we can write our assertions that are used to verify the test. A test can have multiple assertions but, we recommend enclosing all assertions in a `assertAll()` block as shown below:

```groovy
assertAll(
            { assert workflow.success },
            { assert snapshot(workflow.out).match() }
          )
```
:::note
It's `workflow.` and whereas with modules it's `process.`.
:::

- Run the test to create a snapshot of your module test. This will create a `.nf.test.snap` file

```bash
nf-test test --tag "<subworkflow>" --profile docker --update-snapshot
```

- Re-run the test again to verify if snapshots match

```bash
nf-test test --tag "<subworkflow>" --profile docker
```

- Create a new `tags.yml` in the `subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/tests/` folder and add only the corresponding subworkflow tag from `tests/config/pytest_modules.yml`

```yaml
subworkflows/<subworkflow>:
  - subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/**
```

:::note
Remove the corresponding tags from `tests/config/pytest_modules.yml` so that py-tests for the module will be skipped on github CI
:::

:::note

> The tag has to contain both `subworkflows/<subworkflow>` and not just `<subworkflow>` as supposed with modules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tag has to contain both `subworkflows/<subworkflow>` and not just `<subworkflow>` in contrast to modules.
```

```

- Git checkout a new branch for your subworkflow tests

```bash
git checkout -b <branch>
```

- Create a new tests directory within your subworkflow directory

```bash
mkdir subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/tests
```

- Generate a test file from template for your subworkflow using nf-test

```bash
nf-test generate workflow subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/main.nf
```

:::note
We use `workflow` instead of `process` as it is a subworkflow not a module.
:::

- Move the generated test file to the tests directory

```bash
mv subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/main.nf.test subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/tests/
```

- Open the `main.nf.test` file and change the path for the script to a relative path `../main.nf`

```diff title="main.nf.test"
nextflow_workflow {
     name "Test Workflow SUBWORKFLOW"
-    script "subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/main.nf"
+    script "../main.nf"
     process "SUBWORKFLOW"
```

- Then add tags to identify this module

```groovy title="main.nf.test"
tag "subworkflows"
tag "subworkflows_nfcore"
tag "subworkflows/<subworkflow>"
tag "<subworkflow>"
tag "<tool1>"
tag "<tool1/sub-tool1>"
tag "<tool2>"
tag "<tool2/sub-tool2>"

> tag "<module2>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

:::note

> We require to have `tag subworkflows/<subworkflow>` as so it's picked up correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We require to have `tag subworkflows/<subworkflow>` so it's picked up correctly during CI testing.
```

:::

:::note
Include the used tools and modules in the tags.
:::

- Provide a test name preferably indicating the test-data and file-format used. Example: `test("homo_sapiens - [bam, bai, bed] - fasta - fai")`

:::note
Multiple tests are allowed in a single test file.
:::

- If migrating an existing subworkflow, get the inputs from current pytest files `tests/subworkflow/nf-core/subworkflow/main.nf` and provide as positional inputs `input[0]` in nf-test file

```groovy
input[0] = [
            [id:"ref"],
            file(params.test_data['homo_sapiens']['genome']['genome_fasta_fai'], checkIfExists: true)
           ]
```

- Next, in the `then` block we can write our assertions that are used to verify the test. A test can have multiple assertions but, we recommend enclosing all assertions in a `assertAll()` block as shown below:

```groovy
assertAll(
            { assert workflow.success },
            { assert snapshot(workflow.out).match() }
          )
```

:::note

> It's `workflow.` and whereas with modules it's `process.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's `workflow.` whereas with modules it's `process.`.
```

:::

- Run the test to create a snapshot of your module test. This will create a `.nf.test.snap` file

```bash
nf-test test --tag "<subworkflow>" --profile docker --update-snapshot
```

- Re-run the test again to verify if snapshots match

```bash
nf-test test --tag "<subworkflow>" --profile docker
```

- Create a new `tags.yml` in the `subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/tests/` folder and add only the corresponding subworkflow tag from `tests/config/pytest_modules.yml`

```yaml
subworkflows/<subworkflow>:
  - subworkflows/nf-core/<subworkflow>/**
```

:::note

> Remove the corresponding tags from `tests/config/pytest_modules.yml` so that py-tests for the module will be skipped on github CI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove the corresponding tags from `tests/config/pytest_modules.yml` so that py-tests for the subworkflow will be skipped on github CI
```
